# FX Price Pattern Research

## Introduction

### Price Charts - Candlesticks
A Candlestick chart plots the price (Y) over a time series (X) with each bar representing an interval of time, e.g. seconds, minutes, hours, days ... etc. Each bar contains the Open, High, Low, Close, and Volume (OHLCV) of the price at that interval. For example, a candlestick starting at 10:00 on a 5 minute timeframe would have the OHLCV data between 10:00:00 and 10:04:59. The next bar would start at 10:05:00. This offers a simplified way to visualise more detailed price movement within the time interval, capturing the price extremes (high/low) with the open and close quotes. Since Candlesticks condense more info in the time interval than line charts, they are often preferred by traders and widley available on charting packages. 

### Candlestick Price Patterns and Technical Analysis
It is somewhat accepted that Candlestick charts can display repeatable patterns of price behaviour, which may represent the demand of participants in the market and infer the direction of price over a period of time. Steve Nixon wrote a book on Japanse Candlesticks Chart Patterns and brought the idea from Asia to US/Europe in the 1990's, however I am unaware of any research that shows the estimated probability of moving price in a particular direction after a pattern occuring. Steve Nixon was careful to mention in his book that the patterns are somewhere between Art and Science, not revealing how far price will move, but giving clues to market demand for higher or lower prices. 

Candlesticks chart patterns can be combined with tradtional Technical Analysis (TA), which is the manual study chart patterns that can occur on line or bar charts. For example, traditional TA introduces concepts of, support, resistance, trend lines, reversal patterns, and indicators such as moving averages, RSI ... etc. His argument was that when Candlestick chart patterns occur in combnation with TA patterns, the patterns become more powerful and more likely. That said, we can only verify the likelihood of success by running a significant number of trials for Candlestick patterns that occur with TA patterns. Candlestick and TA trials will be a component of this research. 

### The FX Market
Candlestick and TA patterns visually show the effects of directional price movement, but they are not the cause of the movement, although they may play a small role in it. According to the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), the Foreign Exchange (FX) market traded $9.6 trillion USD per day in 2025, with 46% of the volume attributed to inter-dealer trading, and 50% of the volume traded between FX dealers and other financial institutions. This means 96% of the FX market volume is done by FX dealers and financial institutions. The FX Spot market accounts for 31% of daily volume, with FX Swaps at 42%, and FX Forwards accounting for 19%. In 2025 38% of FX volume was traded from the UK, and 19% in the US. The most traded currency is the USD which was seen on 89% of all traded pairs.

These statistics highlight that the market is dominated by financial institutions, with the dollar being the most traded currency followed by GBP, JPY, and CHF. Around 50% of the daily FX trading volume is done between the US and UK, so the London / New York FX overlap is a highly liquid and important time to trade. Since the USD is the most traded currency, econonmic data releases from the US have weight, and will be watched by more traders. In addition, 42% of traded contracts involve FX Swaps, so participants are also hedging currency risk, interest rate differentials, and attempting to get cheaper loans. Any changes around interest rates, bond yields, inflation, or sizeable moves in the other currency in the pair, will have an effect on the Swaps and therefore the price.   

### Price Discovery
The FX market structure and macroeconomics needs to be considered when looking for fundamental drivers that can move price. They play a part in the decision making process of why a financial institution may be proactively trading a currency ahead of a data release, or trading reactively to the release. This gives you the human reasoning, but technically price moves in a given direction because of order flows in the market.

All financial markets take the form of an auction, where participants send in a Bid to buy an asset at their desired price, or send in their Asking price for an asset they want to sell. The main party of the transaction is the dealer, who acts as a market maker for the participants. In FX, for the dealer to make a profit they charge a transaction fee, to manage the order and add it to their orderbook. 

The orderbook contains all of the orders in the market, which is made up of Bids and Offers at multiple price levels. In the orderbook the Bid price is always lower than the Ask price. If the Bid is at the Ask price or higher, a trade will occur. The orderbook matches the nearest Bid to the nearest Ask/Offer price (i.e. NBNO). The price is quoted to the market by showing the highest Bid, and lowest Offer. The difference between the Bid and the Offer is called the spread. When the spread is small, it indicates the market is active and has high liquidity. This means there's a lot participants sending in Bids and Offers and the orderbook doesnt have to stretch wide to find Bid/Offer prices.

When participants want to trade at market prices, they simply accept the nearest bid to sell the asset, or accept the offer price to buy the asset. When this transaction happens orders are removed from the book, and if there are no more orders left at that price level, the orderbook moves to the next price in the book. For example, say I want to buy at market £150,000 worth of USD at 1.3350, but there is only £100,000 worth left at that price, the orderbook will take my order and buy £100,000 at 1.3350, then buy the remaining £50,000 at the next Ask price, e.g. 1.3355. For the next participant wanting to buy at market prices, the new GBP/USD price would be 1.3355. If I sent a limit order to the market, then the orderbook would only complete the order at the 1.3350 level, but if nobody wants to drop their Ask price to that level for the amount that I need, my order would not get filled. This is how orders flow through the market and is the actual mechanism that moves prices.